docs/mapmuts_preferencescorrelate.rst, before:

.. _mapmuts_preferencescorrelate.py:

=========================================
mapmuts_preferencescorrelate.py
=========================================

This is an analysis script for the output produced by :ref:`mapmuts_inferpreferences.py`. It makes plots of the correlation between the amino-acid preferences (:math:`\pi_{r,a}`) for all amino acids *a* at all sites *r* for multiple analyses or samples. So the typical goal of running this script would be to compare the amino-acid preferences inferred for two different samples to examine the similarity of the inferred values.


Dependencies
-----------------
This script requires `matplotlib`_ to make the plots. It will raise an error if `matplotlib`_ is not available. This script also requires `scipy`_ in order to calculate correlation coefficients. However, you can still use the script if `scipy`_ is unavailable -- you just won't get any correlation coefficients.


Running the script
--------------------
To run this script, simply create an input file with the format described below. If you name your input file ``preferencescorrelate_infile.txt``, then run the command::

    mapmuts_preferencescorrelate.py preferencescorrelate_infile.txt


Input file
--------------
The input file is a text file with a series of *key* / *value* pairs. The required keys are indicated below. The values should not include spaces.

Lines beginning with # and empty lines are ignored.

Keys for the input file:

* *preferencesfiles* : A listing of the equilibrium preferences files generated as ``*_equilibriumpreferences.txt`` by :ref:`mapmuts_inferpreferences.py`. You must list at least two files here (otherwise there is nothing to correlate), but can list more than two if you also want to look at pairwise correlations between larger sets of samples. The files must exist, and the filenames cannot contain any spaces. To list multiple files, just separate them by spaces. The files do not have to be consistent in whether or not they contain stop codons as possible amino acids -- however, if one of the two files in a pair contains a stop codon and the other doesn't, then the preferences are renormalized the exclude the stop codon preference in the data that contains it. If both contain stop codons, then these are counted as potential amino acids.

* *samplenames* : A listing of the sample names for each of the files specified by *preferencesfiles*. These are the names that are given to the samples in plots that compare across multiple samples. You must specify the same number of sample names here as you specify files under *preferencesfiles*, so there is one name for each corresponding sample. The sample names can NOT contain spaces, and different sample names are separated by spaces. However, if you include an underscore in the sample name then it is converted to a space in the actual plots.

* *plotdir* specifies the directory where we place the plots. If you want them to be in the current directory, just make this ``./``. Otherwise specify some other directory, such as ``preferences_correlations/``. Directories specified by this prefix must already exist -- nonexistent directories are NOT created, and an error will be raised if you specify a directory that does not already exist.

* *alpha* is an optional argument. It specifies the transparency of the points in the correlation plot. A value of *alpha* equal to one corresponds to no transparency. A value of *alpha < 1* makes the points somewhat transparent. This might be useful if you want to better visualize the density of points and many points fall on top of each other. You must set *alpha* > 0 and <= 1. In general, the maximum intensity at a spot on the plot will not be obtained until there are *1.0 / alpha* points on that spot. If you do not specify a value of *alpha*, it defaults to one.

* *logscale* is an optional argument. If it is left out or set to *False*, then the data is plotted on a linear scale. If *logscale* is specified and set to *True*, then the data is plotted on a log scale. In this case, the correlations are calculated after log-transforming the data.

Example input file
---------------------
Here is an example input file::

    # Input file for mapmuts_preferencescorrelate.py
    preferencesfiles WT-1_equilibriumpreferences.txt WT-2_equilibriumpreferences.txt N334H-1_equilibriumpreferences.txt N334H-2_equilibriumpreferences.txt
    samplenames WT-1 WT-2 N334H-1 N334H-2
    plotdir preferences_correlations/
    alpha 0.1


Output
--------

This script will write some brief output to standard out (*sys.stdout*) describing its progress. However, the main output is the plots created in *plotdir*. There is a plot for each pair of samples specified by *preferencesfiles* and *samplenames*.
The plots are PDFs generated with `matplotlib`_, and they show the Pearson correlation coefficients if `scipy`_ is available. The plots are created in *plotdir*. For the example input file shown above, the following plots would be created in *plotdir*:

    * ``WT-1_vs_WT-2.pdf``

    * ``WT-1_vs_N334H-1.pdf``

    * ``WT-1_vs_N334H-2.pdf``

    * ``WT-2_vs_N334H-1.pdf``

    * ``WT-2_vs_N334H-2.pdf``

    * ``WT-1_vs_WT-2.pdf``

Here is an example of a plot with *alpha* set to 0.1.

.. figure:: example_2013Analysis_Influenza_NP_Aichi68_correlations_replicate_A_p1_vs_replicate_B_p1.jpg
    :width: 30%
    :align: center
    :alt: example_2013Analysis_Influenza_NP_Aichi68_correlations_replicate_A_p1_vs_replicate_B_p1.jpg



.. include:: weblinks.txt

Commit message:

Added Simpson Diversity index plotting option to mapmuts_preferencescorrelate.py

docs/mapmuts_preferencescorrelate.rst, after:

.. _mapmuts_preferencescorrelate.py:

=========================================
mapmuts_preferencescorrelate.py
=========================================

This is an analysis script for the output produced by :ref:`mapmuts_inferpreferences.py`. It makes plots of the correlation between the amino-acid preferences (:math:`\pi_{r,a}`) for all amino acids *a* at all sites *r* for multiple analyses or samples. So the typical goal of running this script would be to compare the amino-acid preferences inferred for two different samples to examine the similarity of the inferred values.


Dependencies
-----------------
This script requires `matplotlib`_ to make the plots. It will raise an error if `matplotlib`_ is not available. This script also requires `scipy`_ in order to calculate correlation coefficients. However, you can still use the script if `scipy`_ is unavailable -- you just won't get any correlation coefficients.


Running the script
--------------------
To run this script, simply create an input file with the format described below. If you name your input file ``preferencescorrelate_infile.txt``, then run the command::

    mapmuts_preferencescorrelate.py preferencescorrelate_infile.txt


Input file
--------------
The input file is a text file with a series of *key* / *value* pairs. The required keys are indicated below. The values should not include spaces.

Lines beginning with # and empty lines are ignored.

Keys for the input file:

* *preferencesfiles* : A listing of the equilibrium preferences files generated as ``*_equilibriumpreferences.txt`` by :ref:`mapmuts_inferpreferences.py`. You must list at least two files here (otherwise there is nothing to correlate), but can list more than two if you also want to look at pairwise correlations between larger sets of samples. The files must exist, and the filenames cannot contain any spaces. To list multiple files, just separate them by spaces. The files do not have to be consistent in whether or not they contain stop codons as possible amino acids -- however, if one of the two files in a pair contains a stop codon and the other doesn't, then the preferences are renormalized the exclude the stop codon preference in the data that contains it. If both contain stop codons, then these are counted as potential amino acids.

* *samplenames* : A listing of the sample names for each of the files specified by *preferencesfiles*. These are the names that are given to the samples in plots that compare across multiple samples. You must specify the same number of sample names here as you specify files under *preferencesfiles*, so there is one name for each corresponding sample. The sample names can NOT contain spaces, and different sample names are separated by spaces. However, if you include an underscore in the sample name then it is converted to a space in the actual plots.

* *plotdir* specifies the directory where we place the plots. If you want them to be in the current directory, just make this ``./``. Otherwise specify some other directory, such as ``preferences_correlations/``. Directories specified by this prefix must already exist -- nonexistent directories are NOT created, and an error will be raised if you specify a directory that does not already exist.

* *alpha* is an optional argument. It specifies the transparency of the points in the correlation plot. A value of *alpha* equal to one corresponds to no transparency. A value of *alpha < 1* makes the points somewhat transparent. This might be useful if you want to better visualize the density of points and many points fall on top of each other. You must set *alpha* > 0 and <= 1. In general, the maximum intensity at a spot on the plot will not be obtained until there are *1.0 / alpha* points on that spot. If you do not specify a value of *alpha*, it defaults to one.

* *logscale* is an optional argument. If it is left out or set to *False*, then the data is plotted on a linear scale. If *logscale* is specified and set to *True*, then the data is plotted on a log scale. In this case, the correlations are calculated after log-transforming the data.

* *plot_simpsondiversity* is an optional argument. If it is left out or set to *False*, then the correlation between the amino-acid preferences is plotted. But if *plot_simpsondiversity* is set to *True*, then the correlation between the `Simpson Diversity index`_ for each site is plotted instead of the correlation between the preferences. For a site *r* with amino-acid preferences :math:`\pi_{r,a}`, the `Simpson Diversity index`_ is :math:`D = \sum_a \pi_{r,a}^2`, and so ranges from values of zero to one.

Example input file
---------------------
Here is an example input file::

    # Input file for mapmuts_preferencescorrelate.py
    preferencesfiles WT-1_equilibriumpreferences.txt WT-2_equilibriumpreferences.txt N334H-1_equilibriumpreferences.txt N334H-2_equilibriumpreferences.txt
    samplenames WT-1 WT-2 N334H-1 N334H-2
    plotdir preferences_correlations/
    alpha 0.1


Output
--------

This script will write some brief output to standard out (*sys.stdout*) describing its progress. However, the main output is the plots created in *plotdir*. There is a plot for each pair of samples specified by *preferencesfiles* and *samplenames*. The plots show the correlations between the amino-acid preferences (unless *plot_simpsondiversity* is *True*, in which case they show the correlations between the `Simpson Diversity index`_ for each site).

The plots are PDFs generated with `matplotlib`_, and they show the Pearson correlation coefficients if `scipy`_ is available. The plots are created in *plotdir*. For the example input file shown above, the following plots would be created in *plotdir*:

    * ``WT-1_vs_WT-2.pdf``

    * ``WT-1_vs_N334H-1.pdf``

    * ``WT-1_vs_N334H-2.pdf``

    * ``WT-2_vs_N334H-1.pdf``

    * ``WT-2_vs_N334H-2.pdf``

    * ``WT-1_vs_WT-2.pdf``

Here is an example of a plot with *alpha* set to 0.1.

.. figure:: example_2013Analysis_Influenza_NP_Aichi68_correlations_replicate_A_p1_vs_replicate_B_p1.jpg
    :width: 30%
    :align: center
    :alt: example_2013Analysis_Influenza_NP_Aichi68_correlations_replicate_A_p1_vs_replicate_B_p1.jpg



.. include:: weblinks.txt
